hey it's me Destin welcome back to
smarter every day
so some of my favorite things to learn
are those things that I've seen for
several years and I've made a lot of
observations and I kind of think I get
it you know I mean like really get it
and then I find out I don't so when I
first saw what I'm about to show you it
blew my mind because it was so simple I
should have seen it my entire life but I
didn't look at this bird the muscle that
flaps the wing is here toward the center
and he pushes down on the wing
but the feathers going out towards the
edge of the wing are overlapping in such
a way that they all push together on the
downstroke but on the back stroke they
delaminate allowing them to open up like
louvers and allowing the wind to pass
through them this means there's a lot
less resistance on the back stroke
basically this bird wing is a
biomechanical check valve that's amazing
I've never thought about that but I saw
in the high-speed video in Peru on the
McCall's for the first time this is why
I've never seen it look how fast it
happens there's no way I could have
observed that but watch the McCall's in
high speed and you can see for yourself
clearly the feathers are delaminating on
the back stroke on the down stroke you
can see that all the feathers are lapped
in such a way that they provide a firm
boundary layer that air can't pass but
on the upstroke look what happens you
can see that the wing separates and the
feathers turn so that the air is flowing
straight in between them you can even
see straight through the wing I think
that's amazing so he has a lot less
resistance on the back stroke than he
does the down stroke another thing he
does to decrease this resistance on the
back stroke is he's performing more of
an elliptical sweep with his wings
instead of just an up-and-down flap so
what he's doing is on the back stroke
he's pulling that wing in and he's
decreasing the length so he decreases
the surface area of the total wing
that's pretty awesome as well so one of
the coolest misconceptions I had is
pretty clear to see on this red McColl I
used to think that birds just flapped
down and they create high pressure
underneath them and they push themselves
up but if you look at this macaw
something else is happening look at the
back of his wing here you can see that
the feathers are being lifted up on the
downstroke what that means is we have a
low pressure situation there it's like
in engineering when we use something
called computational fluid dynamics
basically what we do is we analyze the
flow field and we figure out
what pressure situations we have at each
location now you know that on an
airplane wing we have a low pressure
situation on top that's exactly what's
happening with this red macaw
so look at his wing and you can see that
not only does he have a high-pressure
situation on the bottom but the low
pressure is so great that it's pulling
those feathers off of his wing that's
amazing so not only is he pushing down
but he's being pulled up on the same
stroke that's pretty awesome and this
green parrots doing the last thing that
I thought was pretty wild if you notice
he is angling the tips of his wings on
the backstroke and pushing back behind
him so he's providing thrust but one
thing that's happening that I don't
really understand but it looks like it
could be true he's breaking his wing in
half between the secondary and primary
feathers and he's angling it and it
looks like he's diverting that flow down
almost like a vertical takeoff Harrier
jet it's pretty cool and I think it
could be happening but I've never
actually thought about a bird being able
to provide downward thrust on a backward
stroke that's pretty wild so I thought I
knew how flapping flight works but
clearly I didn't send this to any of
your buddies that like to think
critically because they'll do what I do
now every time I see a bird against the
sky I watch his wing and on the
downstroke right at that point where
he's pausing to transition back to an
upstroke if you watch you can see
sunlight pop in between the feathers
because he's open it up for lower air
resistance on the back stroke and I
think that's awesome
because now I know how bird flight works
anyway I'm Destin you're getting smarter
every day and I'll leave you with this
picture that my daughter made by glowing
homing pigeon feathers to a piece of
paper to create her own bird you're
getting smarter every day have a good
one
we are in the middle of a cotton field
in Alabama you've never seen it it's
really pretty sight what are we gonna do
your son what this bird goes we're gonna
let this bird go but before we let the
bird go we're gonna talk about his
feathers aren't we